Hello again.
In this video, we're going to continue our overview of modern C++.
We're going to be looking at move semantics.
I'm afraid this can be slightly dry, but we'll get through it.
Move semantics is basically an optimized way of copying objects.
There are some situations where you are copying an object to another object and you do not actually need
to copy all the data in the object across to the other object.
You can just move it. And to see what I mean by that,
imagine that you are working with a file in Windows Explorer or the file manager in Mac or Linux.
This file is in a particular folder, and you want the file to be available in another folder. You
basically have two choices.
You can copy the file, in which case the original file is unmodified.
A new file will appear in the target folder and the operating system will copy the data from the original
file to the new file.
Alternatively, if you do not want to keep the original file, you can move it.
In that case, the original file disappears.
The new file appears in the folder and provided you are on the same disk,
the operating system won't actually copy any data.
It's not going to go into the file system and get the disk drive to spin up.
It'll just change some field in a data structure to say that this file is now associated with that
folder.
C++ makes a lot of use of value semantics, which means copying. If you pass a value into a function
or return it, then by default it will be copied.
If you store some data in a container, then again it will be copied by default.
If you have a program which makes good use of value semantics and you can replace some of these copies
by moves, then you should see a significant increase in performance.
So this is certainly worth knowing about.
Let's imagine for the moment that we are in the C++ world before 2011, we have a vector with one million
strings, we are passing this to a function and then we don't actually use the vector again.
The vector is passed to the function by value, so this will cause a copy to be made.
This will call the copy constructor of the vector, which will in turn call the copy constructor of
each of its elements.
So this is going to cause a vector of one million elements to be allocated, and then one million strings
will be allocated within that vector and then the data for the one million strings will be copied from
the original vector to the function argument.
After the function returns, the original vector will be completely unaltered.
So the program has gone through a huge amount of effort to make sure this vector is not modified.
In C++ 11, the vector is moved into the function, so all the data that used to be in this vector is
now in the function argument. After the function call returns, the original vector is now a completely
empty object, but that doesn't matter because we're not going to use it.
So we've saved all these allocations and copying.
So the big question is, how can we take advantage of this improvement in performance?
The way that this works is that data can only be moved into a function call argument if it is passed
as something which is called an rvalue reference.
If we are passing a temporary object, this will happen automatically.
We can also tell the compiler that we want the variable to be used as an rvalue reference, which means,
in effect, that we don't want to use the variable after the function call.
So what is this rvalue reference?
I'm afraid we're going to have to get a bit technical in this slide.
In the C programming language, a value can either be an lvalue or an rvalue.
If it can appear on the left of an assignment, then it's an lvalue.
If it can only appear on the right,
it's an rvalue.
So the lvalue is on the left and the value is on the right.
For example, if we have a variable, let's say, x, that can go on the left hand side of an equals sign,
so it's an lvalue. if we have a literal like the number two, that can only go on the right of an
equals sign.
So that makes it an rvalue.
We could put x on the right of an equal sign, but that's irrelevant. Provided it can appear on the
left of an assignment,
It's an lvalue.
Another example from C is the return value from a function call. This can only go on the right of
an equals sign and therefore, returning from a function returns and rvalue.
In C++, unfortunately, it's a bit more complicated.
We have operator overloading and constructors which don't fit into these simple rules.
However, C++ wants to get the same basic answer so it changed the question. In C++,
the question is, can you take the address using the address-of operator, ampersand?
If you can take the address, it's an lvalue, if you can't take the address, it's an rvalue. For example,
we can take the address of x. We can do ampersand x, therefore, x is an lvalue.
We can't take the address of the literal two, so, two is an rvalue.
We can't take the address of the return from the function, so that's an rvalue as well.
And until 2011, this was really only of interest to people who wrote compilers.
We all know and love references, I hope :)
As you probably know, a reference is really a disguised pointer. When we create a reference, the
compiler will actually arrange things so that we create a pointer. And every time we use this reference,
the compiler will arrange for the pointer to be dereferenced.
Obviously, this will only work if the variable has an address.
So this requires that the variable is an lvalue.
So in C++, if we want to be specific, we could say that this is a reference to lvalue.
C++ 11 also has a reference to an rvalue.
It's really a bit of syntax which indicates that something,  usually a function argument, is an rvalue.
When we write an rvalue [reference], we put a double ampersand after the type as opposed to a single ampersand
for an lvalue [reference].
Here is a function whose argument is in rvalue reference.
Let's go into the compiler.
There's a function here which takes an rvalue reference as argument and it'll print out the words "rvalue reference" when
it's called, just to make sure that we know. I'm going to call this with the value 2
at first. You might want to think about why I have commented out the one with the argument
y.
So that compiles, it runs, it calls the function and prints out "rvalue reference".
If I now uncomment this, let's see what happens... And we get a compiler error. The error says you cannot
convert int to an rvalue reference.
And this is because why is an lvalue. We can take the address of y, so it is an lvalue.
And one of the rules is that you can't pass an lvalue to a function that takes rvalue reference.
But supposing that we decided we don't want to use y again and we want to be able to move from y into
the function argument, how do we do that?
There is actually a function in C++ that is provided for this, it's called move(), and the purpose of
move is to perform a cast on its argument.
So in this case, move() is taking the argument y and it will return y cast to an rvalue reference.
And then when we compile this...
There we are, it compiles and it calls the function, which takes an rvalue reference.
The reason why I usually put std colon colon in front of it is because move() is quite a popular
name for functions.
And if you're working on a large code base, it is quite possible that there's already a function in the global
namespace called move() that takes a single argument.
And in that case, you could get a conflict.
So it's always wise to give the full name space.
The name move is a bit of a misnomer. Just calling move on its own does not cause any data to be moved.
It just casts the argument to an rvalue reference.
In traditional C++, if we have a function that takes an argument without any qualification, so there's
no ampersands anywhere, then in that case the argument will be copied.
That is a "pass by value".
If you do that in modern C++, it depends on the type that you are passing as an argument.
If the type has a certain property and you're passing an rvalue of that type, then it can be moved.
And this will work for all the library types that you and love, like vector and string and so on.
If the class doesn't have this property or if the argument is not an rvalue, then it will just be
copied.
So that means you get the same behaviour that you did before.
So if you have some code, where you have not yet had a chance to go through and add this property to all your classes,
then it'll still work exactly the same way that it did before.
So here is some code to show this. This is a function that takes a vector without using any references,
so it's just like the function in the slide.
We're going to print out the number of elements in this vector.
In the main function, we've got our vector of one million strings.
First, we're going to call it by passing an lvalue.
So let's see what that does.
So you can see it's called the function, and when it reached the function, it had one million arguments.
And then after we returned from the function, the vector in main() still had one million arguments.
So let's see now what happens if we move it, if we pass it as an rvalue reference.
So, again, it has one million elements in the function, so it has been passed in as an argument, but
in main(), after the function returns, the original vector has zero elements. It is empty.
All the data has been sucked out of that vector and moved into the function call argument.
So we have one million strings here in a vector, and then we pass that as an rvalue.
So when we call this function, all the data from this vector is moved into the function call argument.
So this arg, which is a local variable inside func(), now has the data. This variable, vec, has nothing.
And then when we return, we have an empty vector.
And it's not easy to tell, but I think the second one ran a bit quicker.
Let's do it again, actually.
Yeah, I think that one was quicker. Do you agree?
OK, so that's it for this video.
We'll come back and find out next time what this magic property is, that classes have, to be able to be
passed by move. But
until then, keep coding!